
=head1 NAME

Date::Calendar::Profiles - Some sample profiles for Date::Calendar

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Date::Calendar;
  use Date::Calendar::Profiles qw( $Profiles );

  $cal_US_AZ = Date::Calendar->new( ${$Profiles}{'US-AZ'} );
  $cal_DE_BY = Date::Calendar->new( ${$Profiles}{'DE-BY'} );

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module provides some sample profiles (i.e., holiday schemes)
for use with the Date::Calendar(3) module (and hence the
Date::Calendar::Year(3) module).

You are not required to use these, you can always roll your own
(this should be easy!). See L<Date::Calendar::Year(3)> for more
instructions on how to do this, and take the profiles from this
module as examples.

Please let me know of any errors in these profiles, and please
send me your own profiles if you'd like to see them included in
the next release of this module! Thank you!

=head1 SEE ALSO

Date::Calendar(3), Date::Calendar::Year(3),
Date::Calc::Object(3), Date::Calc(3).

=head1 VERSION

This man page documents "Date::Calendar::Profiles" version 5.0.

=head1 AUTHOR

  Steffen Beyer
  mailto:sb@engelschall.com
  http://www.engelschall.com/u/sb/download/

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2000 by Steffen Beyer. All rights reserved.

=head1 LICENSE

This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself, i.e., under the
terms of the "Artistic License" or the "GNU General Public License".

Please refer to the files "Artistic.txt" and "GNU_GPL.txt"
in this distribution for details!

=head1 DISCLAIMER

This package is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

See the "GNU General Public License" for more details.

